
Term | Description
:--- | :---
**Geodesy**  | The Earth science of accurately measuring and understanding Earth's geometric shape, orientation in space and gravitational field. The field also incorporates studies of how these properties change over time and equivalent measurements for other  planets (known as planetary geodesy).  
**Sphere** | A geometrical object in three-dimensional space that is the surface of a ball.  Defined mathematically as the set of points that are all at the same distance r from a given point in a three-dimensional space.
**Ellipsoid** | A surface that may be obtained from a sphere by deforming it by means of directional scalings, or more generally, of an affine transformation. In geodesy, a **reference ellipsoid** is a mathematically defined surface that approximates the **geoid**, which is the truer, imperfect figure of the Earth, or other planetary body, as opposed to a perfect, smooth, and unaltered sphere. 
**Spheroid** | A quadric surface obtained by rotating an ellipse about one of its principal axes; in other words, an ellipsoid with two equal semi-diameters. A spheroid has circular symmetry. Geodesy represents the figure of the Earth as an oblate spheroid, which is an ellipsoid of revolution obtained by rotating an ellipse about its shorter axis. It is the regular geometric shape that most nearly approximates the shape of the Earth. 
**Geoid** | Mathematical figure of the Earth, a smooth but irregular surface whose shape results from the uneven distribution of mass within and on the surface of Earth. It is the shape that the ocean surface would take under the influence of the gravity and  rotation of Earth alone, if other influences such as winds and tides were absent. 
**WGS**  | The **World Geodetic System** is a standard for use in cartography, geodesy and  satellite navigation including GPS. This standard includes the definition of the  coordinate system's fundamental and derived constants, the ellipsoidal (normal) Earth Gravitational Model (EGM), a description of the associated World Magnetic Model (WMM), and a current list of local datum transformations. The latest revision is **WGS 84** (also known as **WGS 1984, EPSG:4326**), established and maintained by the United States National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency since 1984, and last revised in 2014.
**GCS**  | A **Geographic Coordinate System** is a coordinate system associated with positions  on Earth (geographic position). These systems use the 3D model of the earth (ellipsoid) to define specific locations on the surface to create a grid. When we refer to locations using **“longitude”** (East/West measurement) and **“latitude”** (North/South measurement), we are using geographic coordinates. 
**Latitude** | The "latitude" (lat) of a point on Earth's surface is the angle between the equatorial plane and the straight line that passes through that point and through (or close to) the center of the Earth (Y axis). 
**Longitude** | The "latitude" (lat) of a point on Earth's surface is the angle between the equatorial plane and the straight line that passes through that point and through (or close to) the center of the Earth (Y axis). 
**Geodetic Datum** | A coordinate system which is based on a specific ellipsoid and a set of reference points, used for locating places on the  Earth. An approximate definition of sea level is the datum WGS 84, an ellipsoid, whereas a more accurate definition is Earth Gravitational Model 2008 (EGM2008), using at least 2,159 spherical harmonics. Other datums are defined for other areas or at other times.
**EPSG** | **EPSG Geodetic Parameter Dataset** is a public registry of geodetic datums, spatial reference systems, Earth ellipsoids, coordinate transformations and related units of measurement. Each entity is assigned an **EPSG code** between 1024-32767, along with a standard machine-readable well-known text (WKT) representation. The dataset is actively maintained by the IOGP Geomatics Committee.
