Term | Description
:--- | :---
**GIS**  | A **Geographic Information System** is a conceptualized framework that provides the ability to capture and analyze spatial and geographic data. GIS applications (or GIS apps) are computer-based tools that allow the user to create interactive queries (user-created searches), store and edit spatial and non-spatial data, analyze spatial information output, and visually share the results of these operations by presenting them as maps. 
**Raster data**  | Representation of a map, which made up as a matrix of pixels (bitmap), where each cell represent an area on the map with its color (aka imagery).  
**Vector data**  | Representation of entities in a map as basic geometries (made up of one or more interconnected vertices):  points, lines, polygons, etc.  
**SDI**  | A **Spatial Data Infrastructure** implements a framework of geographic data,  metadata, users and tools that are interactively connected in order to use spatial data in an efficient and flexible way. 
**Spatial database**  | A database that is optimized for storing and querying data that represents objects defined in a geometric space. Most spatial databases allow the representation of simple geometric objects such as points, lines and polygons. 
**Geospatial index**  | A spatial database index which allows to search records based on their geographic location in an efficient manner.  
**Quadtree index**  | A spatial indexing technique where each node represents a bounding box covering some part of the space being indexed, with the root node covering the entire area and each internal node has exactly four children. 
**R-Tree**  | A tree data structure used for spatial access methods, i.e., for indexing multi-dimensional information such as geographical coordinates, rectangles or polygons. 
**DEM**  | A **Digital Elevation Model** is a 3D computer graphics representation of elevation  data to represent the surface of a planet (e.g. Earth), moon, or asteroid, above a certain datum. A "global DEM" refers to a discrete global grid. 
**DTM**  | The **Digital Terrain Model** represents the elevation of the bare earth without considering any over-ground features like plants and buildings.  
**DSM**  | The **Digital Surface Model** represents the elevation of the earth's surface that a  remote sensing system will first meet (“blanket”). Thus, the resulting DSM includes the elevation of the bare earth terrain plus the natural (e.g., trees, shrubs) and man-made features (e.g., buildings, bridges).
**TIN**  | A **Triangulated Irregular Network** is a representation of a continuous surface consisting entirely of triangular facets, used mainly as Discrete Global Grid in primary elevation modeling. 
**SRTM**  | The **Shuttle Radar Topography Mission** is an international research effort that obtained digital elevation models on a near-global scale from 56°S to 60°N (approximately 80% of the Earth's surface), to generate the most complete high-resolution digital topographic database of Earth, prior to the release of the **ASTER GDEM** in 2009.  
**ASTER GDEM**  | The **Global Digital Elevation Model** is a joint operation between NASA and Japan's Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI), the Global DEM is the most complete mapping of the earth ever made, covering 99% of its surface. The GDEM covers the planet from 83 degrees North to 83 degrees South, becoming the first earth mapping system that provide comprehensive coverage of the polar regions. 
**Tiled web map**  | A **tiled web map, slippy map** (OSM) or **tile map** (raster or vector) is a map displayed in a browser by seamlessly joining dozens of individually requested image or vector data files over the Internet. It is the most popular way to display and navigate maps, replacing other methods such as **WMS** which typically display a single large image, with arrow buttons to navigate to nearby areas. 
**LOD**  | **Level of Detail** refers to the complexity of a 3D model representation. **LOD** can be decreased as the model moves away from the viewer or according to other metrics such as object importance, viewpoint-relative speed or position.
**Geoportal**  | A type of web portal used to find and access geographic information (geospatial information) and associated geographic services (display, editing, analysis, etc.) via the Internet. Geoportals are important for effective use of **GIS** and a key element of **SDI**. 