Term | Description
:--- | :---
**Cartography**  | The study and practice of making maps. Combining science, aesthetics, and technique, cartography builds on the premise that reality (or an imagined reality) can be modeled in ways that communicate spatial information effectively.
**Map projection**  | A way to flatten a globe's surface (ellipsoid) into a plane in order to make a map. This requires a systematic transformation of the latitudes and longitudes of locations from the surface of the globe into locations on a plane.
**SRS/CRS**  | A **Spatial/Coordinate Reference System** is a coordinate-based local, regional or global system used to locate geographical entities. A spatial reference system defines a specific map projection, as well as transformations between different spatial reference systems. 
**Projected Coordinate System**  | A projected coordinate system is a grid used as a reference for locations on the planet, but it’s a translation of the 3D grid onto a 2D plane (like a paper map or a computer screen).
**Mercator projection**  | A cylindrical map projection presented by Flemish geographer and cartographer  Gerardus Mercator in 1569. It became the standard map projection for navigation  because it is unique in representing north as up and south as down everywhere while preserving local directions and shapes. 
**Web Mercator projection**  | **(Google) Web Mercator / Spherical Mercator / Pseudo-Mercator**, is a variant of the Mercator projection and is the de facto standard for Web mapping applications. It takes the WGS84 coordinate system and projects it onto a square. Web Mercator rose to prominence when Google Maps adopted it in 2005. It is used by virtually all major online map providers, including Google Maps, Mapbox, Bing Maps, OSM,  Mapquest, ESRI, and many others. Its official EPSG identifier is **EPSG:3857**.
**UTM**  | The **Universal Transverse Mercator** is a map projection system for assigning  coordinates to locations on the surface of the Earth. Like the traditional method of latitude and longitude, it is a horizontal position representation, which means it ignores altitude and treats the earth as a perfect ellipsoid. However, it differs from global lat/long in that it divides earth into 60 zones and projects each to the plane as a basis for its coordinates. Specifying a location means specifying the zone and the x, y coordinate in that plane. 
**Photogrammetry**  | The science and technology of obtaining reliable information about physical objects and the environment through the process of recording, measuring and interpreting photographic images and patterns of electromagnetic radiant imagery and other phenomena.
**Orthophoto**  | An aerial photograph or satellite imagery geometrically corrected ("orthorectified") such that the scale is uniform: the photo or image follows a given map projection. Unlike an uncorrected aerial photograph, an orthophoto can be used to measure true distances, because it is an accurate representation of the Earth's surface, having been adjusted for topographic relief, lens distortion, and camera tilt.
**True Orthophoto**  | An orthophoto with a vertical view of the earth’s surface, eliminating building tilting and allowing a view of nearly any point on the ground.
**Discrete Layer**  | A discrete layer represents a geographical region and is composed of multiple orthophoto mosaics (orthomosaics) with the same resolution, color scheme, and classification.
**CE90, LE90, SE90**  | Imagery accuracy measurements: <br/><br/> **CE90** is the **Circular Error** at the 90th percentile. This means that a minimum of 90% of the points measured has a **horizontal** error less than the stated CE90 value. <br/>**LE90** is the 90th percentile **Linear Error**, meaning that a minimum of 90% of **vertical** errors fall within the stated LE90 value. <br/> **SE90** is the 90th percentile **Spherical Error**, meaning that a minimum of 90% of **spatial** errors fall within the stated SE90 value, which is a measure that combines the traditional LE90 and CE90 measures.