Term | Description
:--- | :---
**DTED**  | **Digital Terrain Elevation Data** is a standard of digital datasets which consists of a matrix of terrain elevation values, i.e., a DEM. Terrain elevations are described as the height above the Earth Gravitational Model 1996 (EGM96) geoid, not the WGS84 reference ellipsoid. The DTED format for level 0, 1 and 2 is described in U.S. Military Specification Digital Terrain Elevation Data (DTED).
**GPKG**  | OGC **GeoPackage** is an open, non-proprietary, platform-independent and standards-based data format for geographic information system implemented as a SQLite database container. With the backing of the US military, GeoPackage has seen wide widespread support from various government, commercial, and open source organizations.
**glTF**  | **Graphics Language Transmission Format** is a standard, JSON-based file format for 3D scenes and models. An open standard developed and maintained by the  Khronos Group, it supports 3D model geometry, appearance, scene graph  hierarchy and animation.
**3D Tiles**  | OGC **3D Tiles** is an open specification for sharing, visualizing, fusing, and interacting with massive heterogenous 3D geospatial content across desktop, web, and mobile applications. It is designed for streaming and rendering massive 3D geospatial content such as Photogrammetry, 3D Buildings, BIM/CAD, Instanced Features, and Point Clouds. It defines a hierarchical data structure and a set of tile formats which deliver renderable content.
**CDB**  | OGC **Common DB** standard defines a standardized model and structure for a single, “versionable”, virtual representation of the earth. A CDB structured data store provides for a geospatial content and model definition repository that is plug-and-play interoperable between database authoring workstations.
**GML**  | OGC **Geography Markup Language** is an XML grammar for expressing geographical features. GML serves as a modeling language for geographic systems as well as an open interchange format for geographic transactions on the Internet.
**CityGML**  | An open standardised data model and exchange format to store digital 3D models of cities and landscapes. It defines ways to describe most of the common 3D features and objects found in cities (such as buildings, roads, rivers, bridges, vegetation and city furniture) and the relationships between them. It also defines different standard levels of detail (LoDs) for the 3D objects, which allows the representation of objects for different applications and purposes, such as simulations, urban data mining, facility management, and thematic inquiries.
**GeoJSON**  | An open standard, JSON-based format designed for representing simple geographical features, along with their non-spatial attributes.
**SLD**  | OGC **Styled Layer Descriptor** is an XML schema specified by for describing the appearance of map layers. It is capable of describing the rendering of vector and raster data.
**KML**  | **Keyhole Markup Language** is an XML notation for expressing geographic annotation and visualization within 2D maps and 3D Earth browsers. KML was developed for use with Google Earth, which was originally named Keyhole Earth Viewer. KML became an international standard of **OGC** in 2008.
**I3S**  | A single **Indexed 3D Scene Layers** data set, referred to as a Scene Layer, is a container for arbitrarily large amounts of heterogeneously distributed 3D geographic data (defined by **OGC**). Scene Layers are designed to be used in mobile, desktop, and server-based workflows and can be accessed over the web or as local files.
**GeoTIFF**  | A public domain metadata standard which allows georeferencing information to be embedded within a TIFF file. The potential additional information includes map projection, coordinate systems, ellipsoids, datums, and everything else necessary to establish the exact spatial reference for the file.
**COG**  | **Cloud Optimized GeoTIFF** is a regular GeoTIFF file, aimed at being hosted on a HTTP file server, with an internal organization that enables more efficient workflows on the cloud.
**WPS**  | OGC **Web Processing Service** Interface Standard provides rules for standardizing inputs and outputs (requests and responses) for invoking geospatial processing services, such as polygon overlay, as a web service. The WPS standard defines how a client can request the execution of a process, and how the output from the process is handled.
**OGC API**  | The OGC API family of standards are being developed to make it easy for anyone to provide geospatial data to the web. These standards build upon the legacy of the OGC Web Service standards (WMS, WFS, WCS, WPS, etc.), but define resource-centric APIs (REST) that take advantage of modern web development practices.