Term | Description
:--- | :---
**GPS**  | The **Global Positioning System** is a satellite-based radio navigation system owned by the United States government and operated by the United States Space Force. It is one of the global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) that provides geolocation  and time information to a GPS receiver anywhere on or near the Earth where there is an unobstructed line of sight to four or more GPS satellites.
**OSM**  | **OpenStreetMap** is a collaborative project to create a free editable map of the world. The geodata underlying the map is considered the primary output of the project. The creation and growth of OSM has been motivated by restrictions on use or availability of map data across much of the world, and the advent of inexpensive portable satellite navigation devices.
**GEE**  | **Google Earth Enterprise** is a geospatial application which provides the ability to build and host custom 3D globes and 2D maps. 
**OpenLayers**  | An open-source JavaScript library for displaying map data in web browsers as slippy maps. It provides an API for building rich web-based geographic applications similar to Google Maps and Bing Maps.
**OSG**  | **OpenSceneGraph** is an open-source 3D graphics API used by application developers in fields such as visual simulation, computer games, virtual reality, scientific visualization and modeling.
**GDAL**  | The **Geospatial Data Abstraction Library** is a computer software library from the Open Source Geospatial Foundation, for reading and writing raster and vector  geospatial data formats. As a library, it presents a single abstract data model to the calling application for all supported formats.
**GeoServer**  | An open-source server that allows users to share, process and edit geospatial data. Designed for interoperability, it publishes data from any major spatial data source using open standards. 
**MapProxy**  | An open-source proxy for geospatial data. It caches, accelerates and transforms data from existing map services and serves any desktop or web GIS client.
**Cesium**  | A complete platform for 3D geospatial data – handling everything from optimization to visualization to analytics. CesiumJS is an open source JavaScript library for world-class 3D mapping.
**GDB**  | ArcGIS geodatabase is a collection of geographic datasets of various types held in a common file system folder, a Microsoft Access database, or a multiuser RDBMS (e.g. Oracle, Postgres, etc.)
**BIL, BIP, BSQ**  | **Band interleaved by line, Band interleaved by pixel and Band Sequential** are three common methods of organizing image data for multiband images. BIL, BIP, and BSQ are not in themselves image formats but are schemes for storing the actual pixel values of an image in a file. These files support the display of single and multiband images and handle black-and-white, grayscale, pseudo color, true color, and multispectral image data.
**Leaflet**  | An open source JavaScript library used to build web mapping applications. First released in 2011, it supports most mobile and desktop platforms, supporting HTML5 and CSS3.